---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

This is where I will write about my Advent of Code solutions for 2017. This
year's edition is the combination of two movements in my life:

* The 2015 edition put me on to competitive programming, causing me to take a
course on the subject and taking it really serious, which kept most of my
evenings occupied during the autumn of 2016. When the 2017 edition came up I was
reminded that I really miss it.
* I have been exploring functional programming many times in the past but I have
never really used it consistently for any amount of time worth mentioning.
Because I had still really enjoyed it when I used it, I decided to do the AoC in
a functional language to commit myself to get more experience with it.

This lead me to deciding to wake up the competitive programming parts of my
brain that are (hopefully) still in there somewhere by solving every problem and
trying to do it each day. Furthermore I will do everything in Elixir in purely
functional manners and hopefully also in ways that actually take advantage of 
what it brings to the table.

On problems which inspire me I will likely pull out all the stops and do silly
things that I would never do in a more serious project. If something can either 
be done the straight-forward way using the standard library or by doing some 
crazy pattern-matching thing which would never fly in a real-world project, I
will not promise that I will do the former.

On the other hand, some days will likely be solved in the most naive and quick
way I can think of. Either way, I will try to write up good explanations, mostly
for my own sake but maybe it will be of interest to someone somewhere. Time will
tell.

The full project with unit tests (both inline and in separate files) is at [my
Github](https://github.com/johanlindblad/aoc-2017).
